very weirdly once upon a time I made up
the terms virtual reality and mixed
reality and I had the first company and
I did a lot of other stuff we did the
first headsets commercially also made
the first color when it all did a bunch
of the first apps we did the first car
prototyping app my favorite was the
first surgical simulator later on some
friends and I had a company call in the
90s called I'm addict where we pioneered
the kind of stuff you see on like
snapchat where you can add stuff to
people's faces or this ridiculous aging
app that's going around we pioneered
this sort of face face related software
that's sold to Google the old VR company
ended up with Oracle weirdly they don't
seem to be doing anything with it but I
guess right now it's so long ago anyway
so I've been doing this a long time but
I want to talk to you about most is this
sort of cultural framework so you might
even call them mythologies that we
create to think about technology and
there are two primary ones in my
understanding that have somewhat
competed with each other and I realize
this isn't absolutely true and it will
be untrue for some people so this is a
very approximate sort of a pattern to
notice it's true for me anyway the two
the two mythologies or paradigms or
contexts or frames or whatever you like
are artificial intelligence and virtual
reality both of which get renamed
periodically so when we speak of AI we
could be calling we could be speaking of
deep learning or machine learning and
Bob Loblaw there's all these variations
and similarly with virtual reality where
there's mixed reality and more recently
all the different actually this whole
thing about terminology goes way back
there used to be actually quite
passionate Wars about what things should
be called in the 80s it's funny dream
for many terms he won't even have heard
probably now I I think these two compete
in the sense that they suggest almost
polar opposite approaches to the
relationship between people and
technology neither of them is really
about any particular technology or any
particular scientific question for
instance the face related software which
was the first to be able to track
features and transform a face we also
won the early Myst competitions for even
finding and and recognizing faces and by
the way we had the we discovered that
our face didn't our face finder didn't
recognize black people in the 90s we'd
that problem is old and shouldn't be a
surprise anymore oh my god all these
things that happened but it anyway that
wasn't a I at that time at that time
nobody thought of that as AI that was
part of VR and it kind of flipped over
to the other camp and now face stuff is
considered AI now the idea of AI can be
found going very very far back in the
literature of humanity if you care to
look for antecedents there's a wonderful
thing in Plato about how someday
there'll be robots to replace the
annoying musicians and the Agora
but when we think of the AI cultural
framework most of what we think of was
really formulated by just a small group
of people in the 40s 50s and the 60s we
think of Alan Turing and the Turing test
of course but really the person who most
authored the the sort of cultural world
that defines this was Marvin Minsky now
Marvin was a mentor of mine and in fact
he was my most important mentor and he
was infinitely generous and infinitely
sweet my debt to him is indescribable
and we used to love to argue about the
top
I'm presenting to you now where I always
thought from when I was a teenager in
the 70s that there was something screwy
about the AI narrative and I was much
more the Softee humanist who believed in
consciousness as this thing apart and
didn't believe it's all a giant computer
and blah blah blah and Marvin loved to
argue with me whenever whenever I talk
about this stuff I always think of
Marvin the last time I saw him just
before he passed away when if his of one
of his students called me said listen
Marvin's very frail when you go there
don't engage when some big argument and
so I showed up at the house and he was
like oh you're here I really want to
argue I'm so sick of people who agree
with me so we had this but to some
degree I hope this doesn't sound
boastful but I'm probably the principal
author of the cultural framework that we
call virtual reality now and indeed I
called it virtual reality and it was
something that I and I don't mean to say
that I'm the only one there many other
extremely like just in terms of this
cultural presentation of it there plenty
of other people but the the the way it
was present in my mind and the way I
talked about it in the 80s which was the
first wave of VR mania was somewhat as
an anti powder and a reaction to
artificial intelligence an alternate
framework so I want to talk a little bit
about comparing the two I guess the
first thing I want to make clear is both
are based on illusions and it's just
that their illusions presented in a
different way when a professional
magician a legitimate magician if you
like presents an illusion they have a
proscenium arch around it and they say
here's my trick and that's quite ethical
because if they don't outline where the
trick is they might be deceptive they
might be charlatans they might be crooks
and so that
the proscenium arch has a very
particular ethical role in magic perhaps
more so than anything else that happens
on a stage to me virtual reality is like
that vert reality is saying here's the
illusion enjoy the illusion it's it's it
announced as the illusion it's ethical
an honest about that now in my view AI
is also an illusion or at least it's
legitimately perceivable as an illusion
it gets a little subtle so let me
explain this my perspective which I used
to argue with Marvin about in the old
days is that information this thing that
we can encode in bits or qubits lightly
is alienated experience so what that
means is that when you perceive
something from bits if you don't have a
cultural framework in which those bits
are meaningful then there is no meaning
it's dependent on the person who the
bits are for if you I'm you know just
their various ways to see this it might
not be immediately clear but for
instance the thought experience
experiment alien a Martian or somebody
comes down and - such a Martian who's
never seen written language maybe they
come from another dimension they're not
used to 3-dimensional perception maybe
they're not used to two dimensional
perception but to them they see this
thing which is your smartphone or for
that matter your your VR headset and to
them it's a lava lamp it's a thing that
creates heat as it makes patterns and
they might enjoy it
but they might miss everything else so
the idea of this is very much as you can
store potential energy for instance I
can lift something that that is heavy
and then if I drop it the potential
energy that I stored by lifting it is
released right and so in the same way
when i encode information into bit
in a program or an example set for a
machine learning algorithm whatever it
is I think I am entering in information
and it's only decoded when somebody can
perceive it now the interesting thing
about this way of looking at information
is it gives people a special role it
says that it's the person who's kind of
this mysterious end of the line that
actually has the meaning right now a lot
of people don't like that they're like
oh no don't put people on a pedestal so
this is an argument I've been having
with all kinds of people for many many
years not just Marvin lots and lots of
others
now the thing is this question about
whether people are special or not
whether with their consciousness is real
whether people have some kind of special
ability that is different from special
status that's different from computers
it is complicated and it's bound up in a
lot of it has a lot of baggage it has
more baggage than anything oh my god how
can I start one thing is that there are
a lot of people who've spent their lives
battling against people who are mired in
religious superstitions that often cause
them to be ridiculous
that's not to criticize all people who
believe in religious ideas but those who
oh I don't know believe that it's
immoral to be gay or that evolution
can't be right or vaccines must be bad
or bla bla bla bla bla just like and so
you talk to somebody like Richard
Dawkins as a great example who's been
battling religious people all their
lives and to them to suggest anything
special about people is to suggest an
alliance with those who are
superstitious those who want to use
beliefs in order to manipulate others
and they are often correct that can
happen but the thing is this business
about whether people are special is a
kind of a figure-ground inversion
opportunity if you look at people
interacting with computers you have the
freedom to perceive that as a meeting of
equals or as a meeting
of those who are different those who
have the special thing and machines that
don't this business of where you draw
the line isn't science it's an example
of something that's really pure
philosophy or pure belief from a strict
truth test point of view all of the
places you can draw the line are equally
valid
I used to propose a way of thinking
about this which is called the circle of
empathy and here's how it works you draw
a circle around yourself and you say
those things within the circle deserve
empathy and those things that are
outside of the circle do not so for
instance perhaps rocks are outside of
the circle perhaps there might be rocket
Aryans or something who would disagree
and hold rocks sacred and and it might
be only certain rocks maybe there's
certain sacred rocks but maybe other
rocks aren't sometimes the circle is
hard to place there plenty of people who
would not include all humans within the
circle racists do not include all humans
within the circle homophobes and
xenophobes do not include all humans
inside the circle and so on people come
to blows over where the circle should be
there are those who wish to place the
fetus in the circle there are those who
wish to place animals in the circle and
others who do not and then the this
debate about AI kind of amounts to
whether computers go inside the circle
or not or at least some hypothetical
computer now the thing about the circle
is it's ultimately a moral choice it's
not scientifically a real thing
there's no circle position meter there's
no meter that measures consciousness as
taurine pointed out at the dawn of all
this in the Turing test there's no
absolute test for something like
humaneness or consciousness or any of
these things
it's subjective it's all up to people
perceiving one way or another and so the
Turing test is based on a judge not on
and in these days when when people are
trying to judge whether they're deep
learning algorithm is good or not they
compare it to people performing the same
tasks it's all based on comparisons not
any kind of absolute standard you could
say that about anything in science
except it's not the same because other
things in science are based on
ultimately on universal constants this
is not this is cultural now the
advantages of making your circle as big
as possible is you're less likely to be
an by mistake the advantage of
making your circle smaller is you're
you're more likely to avoid certain
kinds of incompetence so for instance if
you decided to make your circle large to
include bacteria and you say I hold
bacteria sacred I will no longer brush
my teeth you end up at a point where
you're not helping anybody not even
bacteria and so there's a there's a way
that making a circle too large creates
incompetence or they're things that can
paint manipulation for instance if you
pretend to speak for something that
can't speak for itself you might
actually be overriding people who can
speak for themselves which is what
happens when the advocate for the fetus
overrides the woman who's pregnant and
so you can actually become abusive
without even realizing it so this
business is very it's a kind of a
competency morality puzzle and I have
sympathy for those who have difficulty
figuring out where to place the circle
and I don't I don't believe that any of
us have our circles precisely correct I
don't even think that's possible but I
think we can get pretty good at placing
our circle now in the case of the AI
idea the circle is expanded to include
computers
but I think it's important to remember
how this notion first came about and
instead of talking about Plato and his
suspicion of musicians and or many other
writers before Turing let's talk about
touring as one starting point when I was
taught computer science we rose told
that this one of our founders our
principal founder Alan Turing had come
up with this thought experiment and it
was foundational very much like
Einsteins thought experiments about
bullets and elevators and all of that
were foundational to relativity and we
were never told anything at all about
journals life which is now better known
there's been a movie and whatnot but I
was absolutely gobsmacked as they say
when I discovered the circumstances
under which Turing came up with the
Turing test it was very close to the end
of his life it was in the final weeks
Turing story for those of you who don't
know was that he was obviously one of
the very first computer scientists he
and von Neumann defined the abstract
model we used for classical computation
he was one of the first programmers he
had that he was one of the first people
to apply computers to anything and he's
most celebrated for using an early
computer to break the Nazi secret code
that had been considered unbreakable and
giving Britain access to secret Nazi
communications is thought by many to
have saved Britain from an invasion
it was obviously bombed but it wasn't
invaded it was better after the war he
was celebrated as one of the great
heroes of World War two but there was
one problem which is that he was gay at
a time when it was illegal to be gay in
Britain and so he was forced to endure a
bizarre treatment that was supposed to I
was like their version of converge
therapy was supposed to cure him of his
homosexuality but they used chemicals
now for us for my present-day
perspective it's almost impossible to
put ourselves in the mindset to
understand what these people were
thinking because it's just so macabre
and weird but remember in those days the
computer was not yet the model for the
mind there was no this was before there
was this idea that computers and minds
are similar so the thing that was the
model for the mind was the steam engine
that was the metaphor and steam engines
are all about pressure building up
releasing pressure if there's too much
pressure and it's all this pressure
stuff and you can see that metaphor at
work in Freud's work for instance it's
all about too much libido and things
building and all that and so the idea
was that if you're gay it must be that
you're oversexed so the way to correct
it is to inject you or force you to
force you to receive female hormones to
balance you and so touring against his
will was forced to receive these and he
started to develop the physical
characteristics of a female body which
he did not want he became terribly
depressed and so far as we can tell he
committed suicide by eating an apple
laced with cyanide by his computer so
the first computer was part of a suicide
ritual for its inventor and yeah so so
what's going on here that the Turing
test is something that he conceived of
in the last weeks when he was
undoubtedly starting to plan his suicide
because it was a suicide that took
planning he proposed a thought
experiment in which an old Victorian
parlor game in which a man and a woman
each are shrouded behind screens and can
send little messages similar to today's
tweets I suppose to a judge and they're
both trying to fool the judge
potentially in the judge is supposed to
tell which is the man
and which is the woman and Turing said
let's get rid of the woman get that
woman out of there we'll put a computer
in her place and they have a computer
and a man each passing notes to judge
and the judge is asked to choose and
when Turing says is if the judge cannot
distinguish the two shouldn't the
computer be given some sort of
recognition some sort of status some
sort of rights some sort of empathy
something know outside of the context
you might look at this and you think
well this is a nerd argument for
computer machine for computer human
equivalents or something a challenge of
the bar you'd have to meet to declare
computers as not being the same as
people and of course we can always claim
the Turing test has been beat it has
been in a multitude of little ways so we
can get rid of that distinction but I
think in context you see something
totally different in context you see a
moral challenge to the society that was
killing him I think what he's saying is
I have devoted my life to fighting the
Nazis the very definition of a Nazi is
someone who kills others because of
their identity and now you're doing it
to me and I think perhaps he imagined a
more pristine existence in the computer
that didn't have all these issues of
identity maybe he imagined a future in
which other people are also judged not
to be fully human maybe but you know
what when you read him it's funny I've
never found even the slightest touch of
anger or revenge or resentment in Turing
it's it's almost incredible like he was
gentle and he has an amazing line in a
footnote to the first statement of the
Turing to history he says that you know
what even if we consider computers to be
like people they'll still ultimately
have been made by God and it shouldn't
change any of ideas our ideas about
spirituality which is a remarkable thing
to say right at the start isn't it
because people who are facing death
naturally wonder about
Souls they naturally wonder about
survival and that makes this whole thing
even more mucked up and the problem with
the AI mythology is that it has started
to become abusive of people's fears in
the same way that medieval religions
were or unfortunately many contemporary
ones where person is afraid of dying and
then the high priest says oh I get your
consciousness to survive I can back you
up to the cloud and the person says okay
I will fund you and of course this is
all once again a magician who hasn't
acknowledged the proscenium arch they
don't know none of us know now meanwhile
the AI I mean the virtual reality a
virtual reality idea was was conceived
to demonstrate through example that
there's another way to think about
computation something different and I
want to try to give you a little bit of
a sense of why I believe and I want to
emphasize what's VR what isn't VR is not
absolute I mean all kinds of things are
called VR that build seems so to me
and whatever you know and it's a it's a
way of thinking more than any there's no
precise delineation of which hardware
which software is is VR or isn't or is a
mixed reality or whatever I mean might
by the way this thing lists me is
Microsoft when I speak I don't speak for
Microsoft believe me I say things that
horrify them all the time so it should
be under there but if I was having my
Microsoft hat on I'd point out we saw
these things called mixed reality
headsets that are actually classical
occlusive headsets you might ask why
none of us know we don't know why we did
that but anyway this is just to say that
these definitions are not absolute so
[Music]
the when you interact with a computer
that's been designed by somebody who
believes an AI the computer will pretend
to be a person there'll be a thing how
can I help you it'll it'll pretend it'll
pretend to be a serial Cortana
whatever and then this happens enough
and you start to think you're kind of
just one little cog and the giant cloud
brain one little one little cell it
starts to hypnotize you into believing
it and indeed the way the computer
interacts with you is the way you
interact with it and it creates the
illusion for a moment that this whole
thing is just information exchange in a
sense it doesn't matter if you have
internal experience you can still use
your smartphone it still kind of would
be sensible I suppose it's a funny thing
about internal experience or
consciousness or interior a or awareness
or just the existence of experience
whatever term you propose we can
experience it ourselves but as far as
others we only we only know their
consciousness by faith right you have
faith that your lover or perhaps your
dog or your child is actually conscious
in there
I once wrote a comic paper in the 90s in
an academic journal suggesting that the
only people for whom one could tell if
they were truly conscious or not were
professional philosophers where their
philosophy would reflect whether they
experience consciousness and this sort
of daniel dennett heart AI kind of
philosophers were just dead inside they
just didn't have it to which and and I
used to have fun I used to do public
events with people like Richard Dawkins
and Daniel Dennett and and Marvin for
that matter and they didn't end it with
say oh yes absolutely I have no
consciousness inside that's correct
and that's a great you know this
actually works it actually is this total
consistency we agree we're happy I'm
conscious you're not great let's eat
but VR is a different sort of thing
though so here's so let's say you put on
a classical occlusive headset and you're
in a virtual world and obviously the
whole point is that the world can change
so maybe you're in some weird world of
butterflies on an alien planet or
whatever you know all the sorts of
things one does and as you undoubtedly
also know you can change your body's map
you can turn into some different
creature and still control it and feel
like you embody it so maybe you turn
into a weird scorpion and jellyfish
thing so there's much more variable than
there would be in normal everyday life
which is of course the point
so you varied all these things once you
start learning a bit more of the science
and the craft you realize that you can
change the perception of the flow of
time you can change the way people
perceive colors you can change the way
they hear you can change the way people
communicate with each other you can
create merged avatars where the sense of
body connection becomes different than
it would ever be in the physical world
you could just do all these things and
I'm sure there are many more tricks that
are yet to be discovered but the
question is as all these things are
variable there's still something that
doesn't change which is you're floating
in there there's somebody perceiving all
this and that is a remarkable thing
which is easy to miss as virtual world
experiences change you remain there
floating that's you that's your
consciousness you never notice it
otherwise because usually it's just
continuous with everything usually your
consciousness is just part of the flow
of physicality but in fact reality
because the exterior world is variable
that you are still there even when
everything changes there you are that is
you floating there that's an angel or
something now this observation is not a
scientific observation you can formulate
arguments against it you can say it's an
illusion but as I used to say
consciousness is the only thing that is
introduced if it's an illusion that's
one definition of it do you see that huh
so there you are
floating and VR is the only technology
that highlights that it's the only
consciousness illuminating digital thing
now I think there are other things that
folk that also do I mean I think it's
musical instruments do it and why not
but you know to do a digital thing that
does that I think it's it's VR that
would be one of my definitions of VR
anyway I have a lot of them I suppose so
the thing about artificial intelligence
is that it's an arbitrary way of parsing
the world and so is rich reality but I'd
propose that they're opposites I'm not
suggesting they're the only two options
perhaps but they're the two that we know
about to any degree of detail and
experience and culture for technology
virtual reality can be thought of as a
spatial illusion in the sense that your
body can change the world can change
your proximity to other people can
change they're all things that have a
little bit to do with space whether it's
a visual or haptic or audio or whatever
it stills things changing in space or
space-time I suppose if you like AI to
me is an illusion that takes place in
time because what happens if you gather
all this data from people mash it up and
then present it as if it's a live person
at that time but it's really a crowd of
people from before so AI as a time
illusion VR is a space solution
primarily it's a rough once again one
can argue especially around the edges of
that one but where the the distinction
really becomes important to me is
economically
the one of the problems with AI is
because of the arbitrariness and the
ambiguity of recognizing when something
is an AI it's very easy for AI to become
abusive now it might be with wrote
reality to perhaps somebody can use
virtual worlds to train people to become
horrible or something I'm worried that
might happen but so far the great abuser
has been AI and what will happen is
somebody will call an algorithm AI where
when what it's really doing is its
manipulating people it's really allowing
the people who own the computer to screw
with the other people this has a great
history
there's which I wish was better known
the very first person to propose and
design what a network experience would
be like was named Ted Nelson who's still
with us and lives in Sausalito and he
was imagining a super creative artistic
thing that would be very democratic and
respectful the first person to actually
implement a networked experience was a
behaviors name BF Skinner have you all
heard of BF Skinner
so in the early 60s Skinner had the
Skinner was this person who would
methodically train animals and people
and what was called a Skinner box and in
his publicity where you control when you
got reward and Punishment in order to
change behavior patterns and he was this
was his thing and he's one of the people
who documented how teasing people how
making reward and Punishment a little
random and unpredictable actually makes
the mind lock on to it more and is even
more powerful he's one of the pioneers
but one of the things he believed is
that eventually there could be a digital
network that would addicted and put them
under behavior modification and then
that would create the perfect orderly
Society because he didn't like all these
disorderly hippie people he would have
hated Turing he was he was really into
creating a conformist society and so he
actually started implementing these
things with the one of the pre-internet
networks in the early 60s and that this
was all way before ARPANET this was
before those packet switching if you
know what that is
so there's this problem that AI because
AI can be anything and because AI
doesn't usually really work reliably
there's always that little glitch at the
end of it it's never quite right so it's
not ever quite quite there so what it
really turns into is a way to dress up
behavior modification which is what's
happened with our good friends at Google
and Facebook and I love them I mean like
I was mentioning the face software
companies was sold to Google they're all
friends of mine and stuff but I just
think the business plan is so horrible
but that's a whole other story
but what we call AI has become almost
exclusively about giant businesses
tricking people it's become not
exclusively but almost exclusively
there's also once in a while some
algorithm that's good at playing a game
or something like that and those things
get a lot of publicity but in the field
it's all about tricking people so the
thing is if you're starting mentality is
that people and machines are the same
you program machine's why not program
people then it all seems perfectly
normal and natural and why not and yet
there's something terribly wrong about
it it seems to me that you've fallen
into a trap that's rather similar to the
person who says who cares about the
woman I'm gonna protect the Phoebus
fetus and what you're actually doing is
saying I want to control women you know
that's the actual effect and we're sort
of saying you know there's there's this
way that you start controlling people
through computation which i think is
such a horrendous idea that I don't
think we can ever find sanity again
until we cease it which so this is a
whole other talk I give about the future
of internet economics but what I want to
propose here is that the most crucial
thing about virtual reality isn't just
that it can be beautiful it isn't just
that it's a window into our cognition it
helps us understand ourselves it isn't
just yeah it's fun it that it can be
radical none of that is as important as
the idea that you
can't do it unless you believe people
are real because otherwise what's this
whole thing for you know there's a
there's an intrinsic message in the VR
system that the person inside the
headset is the recipient of all this the
reason for it
that is not true when you're connected
to a big cloud on your smartphone then
the center is the cloud it's part of
this giant you're becoming part of this
giant global brain something or other
some that hypothetically supposed to
turn into the singularity or something
you're part of this other thing but
there's no reason to center all these
gadgets around a person unless you
believe in people do you see the
difference all right so I would argue
that that moral centering of the devices
and the software around the person
instead of the big computer is the
crucial definition of our reality and
anything that does that that wants to
call itself virtual reality or some
similar term fine by me then I think
it's totally earned that that
designation now one of the difficulties
we've had in virtual reality is oh boy I
want to talk about some things that
might potentially offend some people in
this room and I'm apologize if that's
the case I don't know you and maybe I
have it wrong so but there was as we all
know this fresh boom of interest invert
reality five or six years ago now when
there was suddenly a lot more investment
in it and a zillion startups and all
these things and the problem with it is
that it was overlapped very strongly
with the gaming world and the gaming
world was going through the gamergate
style convulsions so unfortunately the
particular timing and nature of the VR
the most recent VR revival brought with
it this ugly energy that I was repulsed
by which is kind of why I sat it out I
wasn't really around during the boom
with oculus and all that stuff because
the culture was ugly and that's not to
say that the VR culture was always ugly
but it was always it's kind of like
gaming in itself isn't ugly
but gaming culture can be really ugly
the game itself might be fine but then
the board's associated with the game
might be horrible in that sense the art
was kind of turning horrible and there
were a lot of huge egos there were a lot
of people who were acting out of weird
fears of other people that made no sense
and just all this garbage and I feel
like it's cleaned out a bit at this
point it's a little bit like blockchain
like all the people wanted a quick buck
have finally gotten bored and they're
sure gone and the people who are left I
think like better so I'm kind of wanting
to get more involved with it again
the yeah so that's my short take on it
so the problem though is that because
this huge period of investment where
many billions of dollars flowed into
virtuality rather suddenly was so
focused on a certain mentality and that
mentality was kind of stupid I mean it
was sort of like well I'm gonna go to a
game and I'm gonna be like God and
everybody else sucks and all those
people are stupid but I can program
better it's like this whole stupid thing
I just I hate it and you know what I'm
talking about once again maybe I'm being
unfair but I don't think so
I I really I mean the obvious thing
about it was the misogyny but that
wasn't the whole of the problem there
was just even leaving aside the misogyny
the nature that of what was left had a
had a shallow quality and so
unfortunately we still have a legacy
that was shaped by where those
investments went so the investments went
more into hardware than software in that
period and thus we have great headsets
and barely passable development
environments which is just weird so and
I don't I run into the danger sometimes
of being like the old the elder who says
my day and you kids don't get it and
maybe that's true like I mean I might be
falling into a fallacy like that but
in the old days which for me was late
70s into the 80s it was considered
obvious and necessary that the most
important thing is the development
experience because this was an
expressive medium the whole by the way
it just to let you know that the timer
screen just went out so at this point I
might speak forever for those who are
running the house so the it was
considered and now it says no signal
that's good it's probably Microsoft
software Tina right so all right so it
was considered obvious that the whole
point was for to be a communications
medium the first do you know the name of
the first commercial headset that was
sold you might not it was called an
iPhone but it was a ye phone that was
the first commercial headset that was
ever sold and they were actually pretty
good they were too heavy but the optics
were actually excellent and the screens
were better than you think and they were
okay there but they was called an iPhone
because the whole idea was that this is
a phone this is not like a solitary
thing in fact the term virtual reality
does I should explain where that came
from the the person who invented the
tracking headset
where you move your head around in the
world seems to stay still was ivan
sutherland who's also essentially the
founder and inventor of computer
graphics and is also still with us he's
living in Oregon now and I even used the
term virtual world to describe what was
out there and he in a virtual what you'd
see through the headset and he did that
in a paper when I was three years old so
who's before I was around but he got
virtual world from an art theorist from
the 40s and 50s named Suzanne Langer
so the term virtual world was actually
coined way before the technology worked
and oh yeah it is Microsoft and then
Oh God that might be Apple actually I'm
not sure no it's like yourself okay so
no it's Apple it's an apple thing that
looks like a Microsoft thing what is
going on in the world anyway okay so
Suzanne Langer was a really fast I mean
art theorist who was thinking about many
of these same ideas but not in a digital
context obviously because it was too
early and so when I came along my
thought is what we really should be
talking about is how people can
communicate through these things how do
they connect and so the social version
of a virtual world would be a virtual
reality so that's where it came from
and so it was obvious that if the point
was for people to communicate if the
point was to connect if the point was to
explore if the point was to create
creative variations in the world so that
you would notice that your consciousness
your center of experience was still
floating there no matter what changed if
that was the whole point then the
experience of creating was more
important than the experience of what
had been created and therefore not just
us but everybody who was involved in
early VR tried to create worlds where
you would invent while you were inside
where you could program while you were
inside where you could model while you
were inside and today we have this
totally different paradigm where you can
do like a little bit of object placement
but it's kind of weird and you have to
kinda know how to program and you have
to cobble these things together and
there's hardly anything you can use to
really make serious stuff while you're
on the inside and that's just strange
it's just weird it would be I don't even
know how to describe how strange this is
it would be like designing a car but it
wasn't
worthy and you could only use it in this
little closed circuit you'd have to hire
these people to change the closed
circuit all the time I mean it's a very
weird thing to me and it still strikes
me as weird and but the thing is that
there's such the the gaming culture is
one in which there's all this investment
in a gaming studio that's they put a ton
of money into making whatever it is a
Halo or something which is to name a
Microsoft one and and then you present
it to people and that's a different
thing the gaming world is not it just
kind of glommed on to virtual reality as
this idea at a certain point and the
thing about vert reality is it does have
this kind of sexiness in the way that AI
does it does have this forward feeling
like this is really a paradigm change or
thing I should say that in both AI and
NB and and in VR the supposedly radical
new ideas have been the same for 30 or
40 years you know I mean it just keeps
on keep on repeating the same things but
they always sound new and so this
evergreen feeling that there's this
radical new thing is a way to raise
money in fact in the old days when I
used to argue with Marvin and I used to
say oh but I mean you do know that to
say I think is right and he'd
say well you can look at it either way
but it's gonna be so great for getting
funding so just shut up and go along
with it and then we'd go to DARPA and
get funded you know and and so I get
that I understand that it's true for
both AI and for VR but the heart of VR
has to be creating within it in a way
that other people like so this is an
idea that in the early days I called
post symbolic communication and so what
that means is that most of the forms of
communication were used to are mediated
by some system in which we're used to
things referring to other things like
for instance words refer to certain
things or notes on a page refer to what
you might do with an instrument and so
on and this gets back you remember us
talking about how information is
alienated experience the information is
the encoding of experience right so
we can call that symbolic if we like so
posts about communication would be
something that would combine the
fluidity of symbols with the experience
of the concrete world it would be a
concrete kind of fluidity so I used to
have a lot of ways of talking about this
and I wish I could channel one of my
talks from the 80s because I used to be
very profit like in sort of intense and
I I don't think I can quite do that now
especially after all that's happened
with the internet practically destroying
our world so I have a much more measured
feeling about it now but the way I would
talk about it is um there's a bunch of
ways but here's one there's one about
young childhood so when you're a little
baby you don't understand the difference
between imagination and reality yet or
so I surmise I don't really remember it
so I'm not sure but I think that's true
and then there comes so the thing is if
you're not quite sure what's real and
what's not
it's as if you're a God all the time
like I guess with the gaming wienies
aspire to or something and you you know
like you might imagine some crazy
creature and it's as if it's real
sometimes imaginary friends or creatures
are very real to children and then there
comes this moment and I think this often
has something to do with the terrible
twos and the difficulty of toddlerhood
where you start to get clear oh actually
I'm not the Lord of the universe I'm
this helpless little wet pink thing that
wets itself and is absolutely dependent
humans have this particularly
humiliating childhood because if neoteny
we're we're more helpless than almost
any other species for a long time so
it's this incredible demotion it's the
greater you're from God to this helpless
thing that wets itself it's like this
gigantic fall on it I get on a cliff
right and it's hard to deal with that
and then a little later you learn about
mortality and then it's like things
really suck and like I thought I was god
of the universe this is this is really
hard and so the thing is that gradual
you start learning that there's some
tiny parts of this world that you're
embedded in this physical world where
you do have the freedom to create about
as quickly as you do in your imagination
and there are little parts of your body
that you can move quickly and and with
facility to your fingers but mostly your
tongue in your mouth actually to your
body to a degree and that becomes your
definition of who you are physically
it's a part you can control as fast as
you think
as far as fast as you feel and then you
learn you can manipulate these things in
order to refer to all the stuff you
can't actually do so I can't I can't
actually build a sudden mile-wide
bespectacled octopus flying above San
Francisco with its tentacles stirring
the fog but I can say those words as
quickly as I thought of them you know
and so what it is is it extends the
little part of the world you actually
can control as fast as you think and
feel which is mostly you know your mouth
and your fingers but more generally your
body in order to refer to all the things
that you cannot another thing it's so so
the channel by which people can
understand you as fast as you think and
feel is most often mediated by this kind
of symbol layer like words but and not
always like with music music I'm playing
here it isn't except this is only for
him there's no content to it I don't
know how to if if I was conveying
something about a giant octopus with
this it would be through symbolic layer
in it so with reality potentially if
people could improvise with in virtual
reality if you had a good enough
interface that you could start to make
things as you think of them I don't know
how to build that interface but I do
have some thoughts but if you could
start to express yourself by making
things in it
then people would perceive something
like you're dreaming but without the
symbolic layer they'd actually perceive
the stuff directly right so the idea is
that vert reality has the object the
objectivity of the world the fluidity of
dreaming and so
I would think of it as being like an
extension of early childhood into
adulthood that isn't presently possible
there are many other ways to think about
it but this is this to me is a truer
North Star for the future of art reality
than the people who are saying oh we're
gonna make the illusion better and
better because who cares I mean this is
the thing this is an agenda that just
mystifies me I absolutely understand if
somebody says I want to make a virtual
reality interface where surgeons can
train better or where musicians can
perform better or whatever if there's
some human thing you want to achieve
with it and you need to make it better
and you need better sensors and better a
better software control loop and this
and that that's a sensible agenda just
creating the illusion is stupid because
the whole I mean perception is so
imperfect anyway like what the hell are
you doing it's a very weird agenda for
me and in fact one of the great
illusions the technologists perform to
their own detriment is to pretend that
they're not changing people so for
instance it's amazing to me I talked to
my friends at Facebook all the time and
they still believe after all that's
happened that they're only measuring
that they're not creating that there's
nothing I at regenexx going on that if
you use all of these techniques to get
people's attention and to steer them
around you're only measuring their hard
hard desires that they had from some
other place you're not actually
programming them which is really stupid
I mean it's like laughable in the same
way trying to make this super realistic
VR will just change the way people
perceive it's because it's such an
abstract goal it's not to any purpose so
it doesn't have a grounding it's a loop
that's taken off on its own it might
seem like it does but it actually
doesn't because people are evolving all
the time people are changing and this
also becomes a problem with AI in the
sense that both the RNA I have this
problem if those who do research in
these areas believe that people are
unchanging and there's some fixed bar
where you pass the Turing test and you
make the perfect VR that feels real or
something like that
it's presuming an untruth which is that
people don't change one of the things
that I believe about VR is that as it
gets better it teaches us to perceive
the difference between vert reality and
reality better and better so in the old
days once again as before the era of
computer-generated racist horribleness
and before before all of that before all
of that we had the first demos of shared
virtual worlds of vert reality we had
the first ones in color we had the first
ones with your hand and then like there
was a whole bunch of stuff about our
stuff that just didn't wasn't available
in fact we had the first ones that
weren't wireframes and so it was a very
much sought after demo and actually one
of the things about those years that I
don't miss is how the politics and the
sort of heavy-handedness that people use
to try to get in the demo queue which
was very uncomfortable but at any rate
whenever we did do a demo who'd never
experienced for someone who'd never
experienced it before I'd always try to
sneak something into the room in front
of the person that was an interesting
physical object usually a flower I think
we have a geode sitting around or
something like that and the reason why
is there's this amazing moment that
these days I think it's just kind of
wasted because people aren't thinking
about it this way but there's this
moment where you've gotten used to
whatever the quality is of the VR system
of the moment whatever it's tracking is
and its resolution and it's it's the way
it represents your hands and all that
kind of stuff and how much freedom of
motion you have and blah blah blah all
of that becomes your normal after a
little while when you're in the demo you
take the headset off and then you look
at something from the real world and
it's hyper real for a moment like like
what you can do is you can treat fort
reality not as an alternative to reality
at all because it's not it's a medium
it's a it's a thing we make it's an
artifact it's a performance it's a magic
act
but you can treat it as a palette
freshener you can treat it as a way to
perceive the usual world with greater
alacrity and that to me remains the most
beautiful moment in all of our reality
is that moment when you take the thing
off in the case of mixed reality where
you're still seeing the real world the
the analogous way to do that is okay so
I had them one of my steep my student
interns which one did this Judith
amorous from MIT Media Lab did this she
did this this weird vandalism program
with the hololens and so what you do
with it is you you mess up a space you
can graffiti the walls and you can throw
this gloop it's tough and the gloop
covers things and you can what else was
there I think you maybe you can spray
like foam and spider I don't think she
had toilet paper in it but anyway it's
just like you can basically be and you
can be a vandal and it's really fun it's
actually kind of cool but the thing
about it though is and this might sound
like sacrilege just might sound like the
horrible the most horrible thing in the
world to do but it's an amazing
experience to go into the redwood forest
with that program and a hololens and and
harmlessly start adding artifacts to the
trees and then suddenly you see the
difference and you really see the tree
that's the thing that is so amazing that
you should say why do you need some
fancy expensive headset to see a tree
maybe it's pathetic that one might need
it but whatever works you know and I
just find it astonishing like it opens
my perception and I for all of the
applications of VR that I've been
involved with and there have been a lot
over the years well I won't say that
that's my very favorite my very favorite
is the surgical simulator which I'll say
something about in a second but my
second favorite is this palette
freshener thing like just being able to
see reality by comparing it to something
is the heart and soul of VR from my
point of view so in the 80s an Alaska
and I and a surgeon at Stanford named
Joe Rosen built the first surgeon
simulator in VR and it's evolved and
evolved and gone through many
generations a few years ago my wife had
cancer which he has recovered from and
she's doing great
in her principal surgeon used a
procedure that was designed in a direct
descendent of original VR simulator he
trained for it and it turned out his
teacher had been a student of Joe's the
original collaborator so these things
come around and that's my very very
favorite VR application story